Two, two, three, one, two, three.
Three, two, one, three, two, one, three, two, one.
Okay.
First, we're checking this machine.
This is October the first, 1999.
We're on the seventh floor of the Rudder Tower, and I have the honor of chatting with Dr. Dale Leeper today about the
beginning and great progress of the oceanography program here, which is celebrating its 50th anniversary at this time.
Dr. Lieber, briefly, let's test your mic.
Okay, I don't know what to say by way of a test, but I'm here, and I do remember a lot of these 50 years.
Okay, that's good.
By the way, do you have a card, a personal card?
Dr. Lieber to start with, make believe that someone had not seen a resume for you.
Would you briefly review your background, your experience growing up in college and so forth before you came to A&M?
Briefly.
Well, I wanted to be a,
a high school teacher of mathematics.
I headed that way and actually got a bachelor's from Wittenberg University in math with education and then a master's from Ohio State University and then went to California.
I worked for a teacher credential in California and also later for a Ph.D.
there in meteorology and oceanography.
That was at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography, which is about 125 miles south of UCLA, but UCLA was the administrative office.
So, then I was ready to teach, but it was February, so I worked in an airplane factory for about six months, got into the San Diego school systems.
After teaching in Pacific Beach for one year, I was drafted and taken into the Army just
about three months before the war started.
So in the Army, I went to the infantry and the Signal Corps, and I found if you'd have math and physics, you could apply for meteorology.
I didn't know what that was, but it was better than what I was doing, I'm sure.
So I got one solid year of education during the war in the Air Force at UCLA University of Chicago and Scripps Institution of Oceanography.
Then in 1943, I got to come back from the Aleutian Islands where I was forecasting.
Spent three months at Scripps and back up to Alaska.
After Alaska, I had the opportunity of going to Berkeley University or to Scripps.
Both offers were the same, half time, a chance to work toward a doctor's degree.
The Berkeley one was in the Department of Civil Engineering to start a program in hydrology.
I'd never had a course in civil engineering, so I was a little worried about that, plus the La Jolla Scripps Institution was close to where I'd lived, so I went back there and got a Ph.D.
in 1950.
Meantime, the opening came up in Texas, and I accepted that and came here in August of 1949.
How did you know about A&M's
dreams of having a program in oceanography?
Well, the research foundation here had a director named A. A. Jekula, a civil engineer, author of a textbook in civil engineering, a very nice person and a very effective administrator.
He had organized a research project to satisfy the oil company's need to know
about what happened to the oysters on the coast, the great oyster mortality.
He had 90 scientists involved.
In doing that, the group of them decided the missing link was oceanography.
Dr. Jackler proposed a department to the board of directors and the board set it up within two weeks.
That was January 1949.
Now, the way I heard about it was Dr. Jackler formed a committee to help him choose a department head.
This committee consisted of the director of Scripps Institution, Harold Sverdrup, and a senior biologist there, Claude Zobel.
Those two people recommended me and Robert O. Reed as possible chairman before we had our PhDs.
Reed soon decided he did not want to go into administration, so I won the difficult contest for head of department.
So I heard about it through Dr. Jack, the search for department head.
Did they come to California to visit with you or did you meet them somewhere?
What was the recruitment process?
I don't even remember that.
What I remember is being invited to A&M
for an interview and this was in May 1949.
So I came and the interview I had was with Dr. Jack then Dean Thomas Harrington, M.T.
Harrington and President Bolton on just a short interview, no details.
They wanted to start a department of oceanography.
My main question was, are you interested in a regional approach or just a campus department?
There was no question in their mind, the regional approach was wanted.
and that was all we covered in that interview, no details about oceanography.
Regional meant the entire Gulf Coast?
We didn't say, that's what I meant.
Describe your impression of Texas A&M at that first visit.
Oh boy, that's a difficult question.
The key thing I remember is it was hot and moist and that the people were awfully nice.
And really, the only ones I talked to in any detail were the three whom I'd mentioned.
But I found there was a campus-wide interest in this new program and getting a program started.
And Dr. Jackley had laid a groundwork, which made it very easy for someone to jump in.
My impression of Texas A&M?
I didn't even try to make one.
I decided it was a good place.
You see, what had happened on the Gulf Coast before is people had tried to build an oceanographic institution on the coast.
Florida State, Texas University, Louisiana State, they built laboratories on the coast.
Well, that's near the water, but you don't have libraries, you don't have mechanical departments, you don't have physics departments or biology departments or administrative setup.
So getting back from the coast to 150 miles was quite an advantage.
You could then look at a broader scope and you had the facilities to tackle a big problem with.
Did you sense a general, meaning broad, positive attitude about the creation of the program?
Oh, I really did.
And this came largely from the heads of the Department of Chemistry, Fred Jensen, the head of the Department of Biology, Doak, the Biochemistry Nutrition Department, the Physics Department.
The whole university seemed interesting.
The reason for this is that the old project had given people a chance to do an interesting kind of research.
It had given them a source of income during the summer.
And they'd gotten all these people involved in marine programs and they didn't know anything about the currents or the tides or the sea air interaction.
So they wanted somebody to fill in that gap.
I will not ask about salary except this one.
Do you remember what your opening salary was?
Oh sure, sure I do.
$6,000.
That was a big deal.
At Scripps, when I went there, it was for $3,000.
That was halftime.
But the salary looked okay.
We had four children.
I don't remember whether they were all there at that time or not, but the salary was fine.
And when you arrived to begin your duties in June?
No, in August.
August of 59.
49.
I mean 49.
49, right.
Describe the department's physical facilities at that point.
Well, we were given two rooms in Goodwin Hall, which is just across the field there, two rooms on the third floor, and I was the only employee.
Down below, there were two other rooms, which were assigned to Wayne Stark, who had just come with the mission of creating the Memorial Student Center.
Same time, same place, same opportunity.
How marvelous that those were beginning there.
Let's see, and as far as you're aware, the idea for oceanography originated with Dr. Jackula.
through the project that he'd sponsored on the coast and contact with the scientists not only from A&M but from around the world.
And he was a very wise individual.
All right.
How did you put that first faculty together?
Oh, boy.
My orders were, here are five full-time academic appointments, and here's $50,000.
Build us an oceanography program.
Now, there were no committees, no administrative controls, except the usual stuff.
And I was perfectly free to do what I could with those appointments.
But this is one of the nicest things that any university has ever done for a department.
Just give five full-time academic appointments without regard to student-teacher ratio or research income or anything.
I had those appointments.
And I had them for 10 years, which is unheard of any place, I think, on the campus.
So you ask how the faculty was going together.
I decided instead of specializing, which many labs had done, for example, I think there were 69 marine labs around the coast.
They were all biological.
There were two or three that were geological.
Physical oceanography, just a couple.
So what I decided to do, we were interested in teaching.
That was our prime goal.
And I wanted our students to have contact with a real biologist, a solid biologist, a solid chemist, a solid geologist, and solid meteorology and physics.
So I decided to assign one of these openings to each of those sciences, and one quarter of the $50,000, one fifth of the $50,000.
The first person we hired was a secretary.
This, maybe I can put this in before the faculty.
I was interested in him pulling in all the meteorological capability I could.
I'd had just three years in the Air Force in meteorology.
So I was able to hire a graduate of UCLA with a bachelor's in meteorology to become a secretary.
And she did.
But we had no faculty member.
the first term.
I taught one course, Introduction to Oceanography.
I think we had 54 people sign up for that, just for information.
So this course had a field trip down to Corpus Christi along the coast.
And one of the guides we'd asked for was W. Armstrong Price.
A fellow 60 years old, spent all his life on the Gulf Coast, was well known and well respected in geology
not a no-snuggler, but we made a deal.
He came and he spent 50 years.
Now, he arrived in February, in other words, the end of the first semester that I was there.
Since he was 60, his office, we gave him one of the rooms, and they had to have a cot in the office so he could take his afternoon nap, but he was a very active person.
He stayed until age 65 when he had to retire, and then he went on.
given an honor by a symposium in his 80s, and he kept giving papers until he was in his 90s.
He died in 93.
That's the first appointment, a geological one.
He was a good geologist, and we said, well, we'll help him learn the oceanography part.
The next one was a biologist.
Now here, Dr. Jackley had run this big project on the coast, a couple million dollars, and he asked me if I could find a place for
the head of that project, who was John Mackin, a biologist.
That's the only request that Jackula ever made of me.
I said, sure we could.
So we got a good, solid biologist with experience on the Gulf Coast who filled the biological place, could not report until the end of the first year.
Now it came to chemistry.
We announced the opening in chemistry.
In the country at that time, I think there were two chemical oceanographers, one at Yale and one at the Scripps Institution.
But a young fellow came wandering in one day.
He says he's about to get his degree in biochemistry and nutrition.
That was a very popular field, much in demand, especially at that time.
But this fellow wanted to stay in a college station.
He wanted a job which did not time to a desk or an office.
And so he said, what's this oceanography stuff?
Well, that was Donald Hood who's here tonight.
That's part of my talk, see.
And he became the chemical oceanographer.
We were able to make a deal with him in the second semester, but he didn't come until the next year.
So now I'm through the biological, the geological, the chemical, and I come to the physical and the meteorological.
The meteorological is a new thing we define.
What it means is you have a background, a bachelor's in meteorology, and then you come into oceanography.
Well, the fellow at Scripps had been offered a chance at the headship, turned it down.
I've been working with him for a couple of years out there, talking to him about coming to A&M, and he'd be, yes, he would, and then, no, they didn't teach him.
The director of Scripps told me once that if they ever lost anybody, they should never lose Robert O. Reed.
But he decided to come here, and, well, there's quite a story about
how this happened, I don't know whether to go into that.
Go ahead.
Okay, and he decided to come and was ready to move, and this would now be in 1951, a couple years into the program.
But Reed had a background in engineering.
He had the three years of military meteorology, and then he had gone to Scripps to do oceanography.
He had not gotten his degree.
A German was giving bad time, give us all a bad time.
They used these classical German paragraphs, and we just couldn't, I got through it.
Bob, we even had him go back for a semester to work on that, and he still didn't.
They wanted to keep him.
They were ready to move to A&M.
Their friendship was in a van.
The director of Scripps was in Washington.
He called up and said, hold that van.
And then he called a meeting in Washington with me, who I happened to be there too, and he got two witnesses.
And we talked about whether Bob should stay at Scripps or should come to A&M.
And when the talk was finished, he turned to one of the witnesses, who was Richard Fleming.
Fleming's one of the authors of The Oceans and the director of the program at University of Washington.
He said, Dick, what do you think Bob Reed should do?
And Dick said, I think he should go to Texas A&M.
So they called up and released the van.
And then, well, I told Marjorie, his wife, that College Station had the same annual average temperature as La Jolla, California did.
And it had the same average annual wind speed as La Jolla did.
And she's never forgiven me for that.
And when they came, they had a house.
We took them out to see their house.
There was a hail storm.
The hail was so big you could not move from the car to the house.
So that was their start.
But he, of course, has become a very distinguished professor, a member of the National Academy of Engineering.
It turned out a group of students who were combination oceanographers, meteorologists, who have taken many key positions throughout the country.
So he was the fifth person.
What I did, in other words, instead of getting a physical oceanographer from physics and meteorological from meteorology, I got Reed and I both who had some meteorology and some physics, and he had the engineering too.
So that's the original staff.
Now, you began then in the fall of, the academic year beginning in the fall of 1960.
You began to teach wider variety of courses?
50, 50.
I mean 50, again, yeah.
So in 1950, you began to offer a variety of courses.
Now what this means, you see, I'm there in fall of 49.
If you're going to offer a curriculum the next year, you've got some work to do.
I had to write.
the abstracts and the course outlines for 13 graduate courses before the faculty was there in order to get them in the catalog and announce a curriculum for the following fall.
Did you have any problems with the campus bureaucracy in getting the degree program and the courses approved?
Normally, I would have had all kinds of problems, but in this case, like I told you,
The groundwork had been laid by Dr. Jack.
These department heads, those four departments, when you get them together, geology, physics, math, chemistry, and let's see, I left out one.
But if you have the heads of those departments behind you, you have no problems.
And the graduate dean likewise, Dean Ied Trotter, and he was very helpful.
And the graduate council,
Couldn't believe it.
And the Dean of Arts and Sciences at that point was?
Was M.T.
Harrington.
Dr. Harrington, a chemist.
That's right.
And if they could all be here today, which one would you thank most for their help in getting it started?
Well, Jackula would thank most and M.T.
Harrington for,
understanding what Jackie was saying and allowing it or helping do it.
All right.
Then in the fall of 1950, did you have some students ready?
Oh, yeah.
That's the amazing thing.
We put this in the catalog.
We put up a flag and said, we're starting oceanography.
Now, when you put up a flag, it doesn't matter much what it is or where it is.
It pulls.
So that fall, there were six students who signed up for a master's program in oceanography.
Where did they come from primarily?
They were mostly Texans.
And every one of them got his masters within two years, which I'm very proud of, yeah.
And you still had no oceanography labs yet.
When did you begin to get some additional space other than those two rooms in Goodwin Hall?
Well, first thing we got was a residence on the campus, a seven-room residence.
And we put the hydrographic lab in the bedroom and the offices downstairs.
And that was over here by G. Riley White, I think, somewhere.
Just a residence.
And then we went there so very long, old science became available.
Now, old science was beside the library where biology is now.
And I guess biology had moved out.
It was empty.
It was classrooms.
There were 13 major classrooms.
Nobody wanted that building.
It was old.
You'd look at a ceiling, you'd see a crack.
A wall toward the library was out four inches from the ceiling.
So we were given that building, 13 rooms, and we had 13 people.
And that enabled us to grow quite a bit.
We had a machinist who ordered a drill press that became available on surplus.
The drill press arrived, and the driver came in, and he said, oh, I can't bring that in here.
It's too heavy.
You can't drive on these roads.
It was surplus and free drill press.
But anyhow, we made great use of the old science building.
And then what happened after that, I believe, was when we moved back into Goodwin.
And we took over the whole building this time, plus the whole building of Bazell next to it.
And that was about seven years after we started the program.
Did you have any off-campus requirements in terms of getting authority to do anything?
Did you have to get any approval in Austin?
Yeah.
I don't know whether we had to or not, but we did.
Commission on Higher Education, approved our programs in oceanography and meteorology as the lead programs in Texas.
I guess that's what they designate them to be.
And when did you begin to do doctoral level?
We turned out our first doctoral people in 1953.
So we had some kind of approval for them.
And no campus or statewide handicap
or obstacles there?
No, not then, but about 1958 we hit one.
How was that?
What was that?
We got a building on the beach in Galveston, a beautiful building, 60,000 square feet right on the beach.
The federal agency was through with it.
It was listed as surplus.
No federal agency wanted it.
Next state agencies had a chance.
We bought it for $214.
We had two people.
Now, that's another story.
The lab developed, but anyhow, Admiral Sherman Whitmore of Galveston was trying to start a maritime academy.
And he walked by our building.
He said, what's in that building?
And he worked through our lab director and to me.
And we arranged that half the building could be turned over for development of Texas Maritime Academy.
I worked with him for a year and a half on this.
And the people of Galveston were very enthused.
They needed some activity of this sort.
And we went to the...
Oh, the various agencies that are interested.
The other maritime academies did not want a new one in the country.
And there was a meeting in Detroit, for example, where we had to wrestle through this.
not a military retired admiral, but a Coast Guard, let's see, I don't know what agency it was, an admiral.
But we finally got that going, and Galveston wanted A&M to be the host institution, the managing institution.
Fine, Tom Harrington was chancellor then, and he appointed me as a university representative.
Okay, I work with the people of Galveston, they got all enthused about this.
And after a year and a half, Dr. Harrington called me in and he says, we got a problem, the legislature.
At that time, it was a big budget crunch.
And the legislature had forced Texas A&M and the University of Texas to agree not to start any new program.
So Dr. Harrington says, you can tell those people we're not gonna be able to do this.
And I had to do that.
And they had really key people of Galveston there at this lunch, and I had to tell them that message.
A&M was not able to start any new program or work with them anymore.
Now this building, this surplus building, was part of old Fort Crockett?
That's correct.
There on the beach?
Yes.
So marvelous location.
Oh, perfect, perfect.
And in your work with Galveston people, you encountered
You had a positive response almost always?
Oh, yeah.
They really, like I said, they needed something like this.
They wanted something like this.
But when I told them I had to pull back, that hurt.
But they had two legislative representatives there.
And those people went after the legislature and got this rule broken or an exemption to it so we could go ahead then with the Maritime Academy.
Now, the purpose of the Maritime Academy was to produce professionals for maritime work.
Service, yes.
Right.
And we need these people at sea.
A lot of our ships are run by foreign registration, foreign crews.
It turns out that the graduates of maritime academies will go to sea a couple of years and then they'll often have office jobs after that in management.
But there was some question of whether we needed another maritime academy.
I think there were four in existence.
But Galveston really wanted it, and they did the political work necessary to allow A&M then to pick up again.
So A&M people, President Rudder and the fiscal officer at the time, I've forgotten his name, took a plane load down to Galveston to inspire this thing and get it going good.
You mentioned this man, Rudder.
He came here about 10 years after you did.
Do you remember any of your early meetings with him?
What was your first impression of Mr. Rudder?
Well, I didn't have many meetings with him, to tell you the truth.
My impression was that here comes an A&M graduate, and Aggies have certain beliefs and ways of operating, and that's probably what's gonna happen in the future.
Was he supportive of the oceanography program?
He really didn't get into it.
He didn't have to very much, although I remember one of his annual talks, he talked about oceanography.
Yeah, even Governor Conley came over here and gave a talk, and he incorporated possibilities of oceanography.
So in the beginning, I didn't have too much contact with Mr. Rudder.
Dr. Harrington moved up from dean to president to chancellor.
So you had an ally there.
And then who followed him as dean?
Do you remember?
No, I can't.
That's embarrassing.
I remember we had an English professor who was very nice as dean.
Oh, John Paul Abbott?
That's the one.
He was very nice.
And then we had the economics professor, Walter.
I can't remember his last name either.
Don't remember that one.
And then Frank Hubert came in 59, and you all remained within arts and sciences until the mid-60s, wasn't it?
64, right, yeah.
Let's talk about how the division came to create a new college.
I remember that in detail.
Please do.
And I've written that up in some notes here and stuff.
Oh boy, that's a difficult one.
When Dean Hubert became dean, his academic work had been the field of education.
He had no experience in any of the sciences or apparently in any of the arts.
He didn't understand research.
at field research as ours.
So for five years, he tried to make our oceanography meteorology department fit the mold, same mold as the history department, physics department, everything.
And we were trying to operate ships.
We had platforms offshore.
We have full graduate programs in meteorology, full graduate programs in oceanography.
Three, let's see, $2 million worth of research projects.
I think we had 23% of all the research
University-wide departments.
23 percent?
I think that's what it was.
I might have to check this.
What were the primary sources of that funding?
Well, the beginning resource was the Navy.
the Hydrographic Office, and then the Office of Naval Research.
And they were steady all the way through.
And then later, the National Science Foundation became a possibility.
And each one of our faculty had different contacts.
The Petroleum, Dr. Jekyll thought the Petroleum Institute would be the big thing.
And he took me around to meet all the, well, we didn't get any money from any of them at the time.
We had an API, I guess that's what it's called, Project, Petroleum Institute Project.
But it was quite a spread of money.
I know we had to write some, over the 15 years, some 400 proposals.
So it's very interesting that if you get a group of projects together and a sympathetic research director, you can shuffle funds back and forth from projects to academics.
And the way we were set up, we could put people on the academic payroll for part-time for a while.
Bob Reed usually had a lot of income himself, and he didn't need his total appointment.
So we had a wide variety of sponsors, and not too many from Texas.
The Dow Chemical Company became one, and I was a consultant to them for a while.
They set up a scholarship.
In the beginning, we got a project with United Gas Pipeline Company.
This came about.